Welcome back to the program. We are here
today but with um professor Jang who
is very renowned uh not just for his
academic achievement but also for his
very popular channels and I'll make sure
to leave links in the description. Now
you are you develop models uh for
predicting uh geopolitical developments
and uh yeah they're they're quite
fascinating because you're able to
include a lot of variables to uh yeah
take account for the complexity. Um so
uh yeah I thought a good place to start
would be the uh a topic which many now
look towards I mean if you go on any
social media everyone is comparing
what's happening in the west to the you
know the fall of the Roman Empire but it
does beg the question though given that
you're able to draw on all these
different variables what do you see
making make civilizations rise uh
decline as well as collapse?
>> Right. So um in my analysis of uh world
history I see that when civilizations
rise there are three factors at play. Um
the first is energy. This sort of hunger
of the people to rise up and to um make
their place in the world. That's number
one energy. Uh second is openness. Um
how willing are you to learn from
others? How willing are you to reflect
on your mistakes and to improve on them?
Um how open are you? That's number two.
The third is cohesion. Do you identify
as a people to work together to
coordinate together in order to achieve
larger goals? You look at all um great
empires, they all sort of off as um
these borderland uh tribes that because
of energy, openness uh and cohesion were
able to dominate their part of the
world. This includes uh the Athenians.
uh this includes the Persians, this
includes Macedonians, this includes the
Romans, uh this includes the Americans,
this includes the British and uh today I
would argue that the new empire that
that that's coming out in on the world
stage is the Pax Judea Israel. uh so
among the Israelis we see energy
openness and cohesion
>> and uh how do you assess within this
framework what's happening with the
political west uh that is the United
States and Europe because uh whatever
variable one tends to look at if it's a
politics the economic uh the social
cohesion
uh or yeah there there seems to be yeah
a lot of gloom and uh for for good
reasons perhaps. So what direction do
you see the western world taking now?
>> Um yeah so according to this framework
the western world especially the
Anglo-American empire is in rapid
decline. Um so you look at energy like
how willing are people to work hard. Um
I mean the reality is that you have
these young people uh in the west who
want to be social media influencers.
They and they expect to make $600,000 a
year being social media influences and
that is complete outrageous. Um, and so,
you know, Trump talks a lot a lot about
bringing back manufacturing to America,
but who's going to work these blue
collar jobs? Um, who's going to want to
um just go and work in factories for
like 40, 50 years? And the answer is
like not not not that many young people.
The reality is that young people
nowadays um they prefer to just watch
Netflix. They prefer just play video
games. They prefer to hang out hang on
social media. they they really don't
want to invest their time and energy um
in creating a a great society. So in
terms of energy uh the west is
definitely in the in decline. Openness
um you see a lot of crackdowns on uh
free speech uh especially in
universities. You have DEI and now you
have um a crackdown on um uh speech that
promotes Palestinian rights that uh
advocates against the uh Palestinian um
what's happening in Palestine. Basically
uh during the covid lockdowns you had a
tremendous uh clampdown on free speech.
So in terms of openness we see a massive
decline in the western world and that is
I think very problematic. The third
factor is cohesion right. So everyone
would agree that the biggest problem in
America is political polarization where
the left and the right hate each other.
Um nowadays um they've done polling
where if you are a Democrat you actually
refuse to remarry a Republican
regardless of attraction regardless of
um salary. You're like you know if you
are on the on the other political divide
I will refuse to engage with you. Um so
um in terms of cohesion America is split
pretty evenly between left and right and
this is happening throughout the um
western world especially with the
increase in immigration. So uh
unfortunately all the signs all the
historical signs are pointing towards
rapid decline over next 5 to 10 years.
>> This is an interesting development uh
the rise of political identities uh in
the United States well also to a large
extent well growing extent also in
Europe. The whole idea of the nation
state would be you know it appeals to
some of the I guess u um instincts in
human nature that is that we divide
oursel into in-groups versus outgroups
and the inroup become quite distinctive
uh much like we want to reproduce the
family we have a instinct to reproduce
the nation but uh uh but when the out
groupoup becomes people within your own
group within the nation and this is how
they speak of each other though that
they you said hate but they I think you
said hate well they truly see the the
political opposition not as simply
sharing their future but um and having
different path but they actually see
them as a threat to to the to the yeah
the the ideals and the nation itself and
again it's is both sides using this
rhetoric. So it's quite uh yeah
frightening in terms of um the ability
to stay together in one country if if
this is the sentiment one has towards
the political opposition. Um but uh to
what extent are we doomed though that is
us here living in the western world
because um there's a big difference I
guess between well you can go through
periods of rise and decline but when do
we tilt into collapse here?
>> Yeah. So that's a great point where um
social cohesion is a huge problem in the
western world especially in America. Um
and so the question then is why is this
happening? Why is there um uh so much
social polarization political
polarization? And for for that let's
look at three theories. Okay. The first
is Peter Turchin and he put he proposed
the idea of elite obstruction. And so he
he looked at the Roman um civil wars. He
looked at the French Revolution. He
looks at all these times of political
tomalt. He he identifies lead
obstruction as the main factor leading
to a civil war. And his reasoning is
that um it's not the war. The world
isn't divided between rich and poor.
It's divided between the have a lot and
have and like have some but want some
more. Okay? Between the upper nobility
and between the lower nobility. Uh the
problem is that as society uh increases
in wealth um there's more elite but
there's only a limited positions of
power and so these elite compete for
each other uh for these limited
positions of power and you can argue
that's exactly what's happening in the
United States right now where you have
these Republican oligarchs um as
expressed by big tech you know Peter
Teal LM um Larson these individuals
versus u the financial elite um which um
is represented by the Democratic party.
So you can almost see that the second
Trump administration is really a civil
war between these different oligarchs in
America. So that's a first first theory.
The second theory that we have is um you
know Thomas wrote this great book
called capital in the 21st century. I'm
sure you've read I'm sure that your
viewers have read it but he uh proposes
the idea that over time capitalism
naturally leads to a renter economy
where if you just engage in speculation
you make more money than if you actually
engage in productive labor. So if you
put your money in stock market you
should see about 5% any returns. If you
go open a restaurant or you start a
factory you should see 2% any returns.
So everyone's going to put their money
in speculative capital and that leads to
uh the overfinancialization of society
and that leads to basically um um uh
financial collapse at at at some point
because no one's no one's producing any
any real wealth. The third uh third
theorist is uh Oswalt Spangler uh who
who theorized that all civilizations are
organic and they have organic life
cycles meaning that you know you're
you're born you rise up you mature then
you die and this is just a natural life
cycle and there's nothing you can do
about it. So if you look at these three
theories and you apply uh their
framework to America, America is really
in a lot of trouble and not just America
but but the western world because how do
you deal with lead over production?
Well, the only way you can deal with it
is through revolution, civil war, um
just through calculic uh social
destruction where uh most of elite is
eliminated so that there's more
socialility um in in America. Okay. So
Peter Turchin tells us we're screwed.
Then you look at Thomas Pigoty and you
have the monopolization of capital, the
consolidation of capital in America
where now only a few companies account
for like a third of stock market wealth,
right? So you have the magnitude of
seven um and they account for like a
third of the value of the standard and
and poor stock market index. That's very
problematic because as monopolies they
don't have to create value. All they
have to do is just maintain their
position. And that's why we see these um
you know um this artificial intelligence
bubble happening United States which
which which is very perilous and
precarious for the American economy
because you're putting all these all
this money into these data centers
producing a product AI that has no
actual social benefit and which could
threaten to destroy millions of jobs. Um
and then Oswwell Spangler tells us that
people societies die just like as people
and maybe for the um for the sake of
humanity that's a very good thing. So if
you look at these three theories it's
very hard to figure out a way out of
social the social decline that the
western world is facing right now.
>> Yeah. Well, Thomas Pikerty, he made well
in the book you capital refer to, he
made a point that in uh that the United
States had a better um setup for for
developing democracy because uh unlike
Europe where there was a lot of old
wealth they didn't have this
concentration of economic power in the
United States. Of course, if you forward
to the present era, then uh this is
obviously no longer the case. There was
also an argument by um uh by Alexis the
Tokville by the way. But now of course
it's a very different world. You have
this concentration of wealth which uh
has its consequence. But to what extent
do you see the problems of today though
being an extension of the global
financial crisis because if you remember
back in 2008 and 9 uh there was a lot of
concerns that the US-led economic model
had exhausted itself. The US had
borrowed too much, spent too much and uh
yeah, some of the energy was gone. Too
much cheap money essentially. But the
solution became to borrow more and spend
more and essentially inflate some asset
bubbles and uh most people would
recognize then that this was merely
kicking the can down the road. Is this
where we are now? The cheap money being
kicked down the road because I can't
remember in 2009 I think it was about $9
trillion debt. Now they're up to 38
trillion. it's uh it's going to be much
harder now and they can't use the same
instruments uh or how how do you see
this issue of cheap money?
>> Yeah. So um you know I I think you make
you bring up a good point about the 2008
2009 great financial crisis where um the
great financial crisis really marked a
turning point in American history. You
could argue western history as well. Uh
so the 2008 financial crisis was a
culmination of very troubling trends uh
ever started ever since the Reagan
neoliberal era. So the first trend was
the move from manufacturing to
financialization of the economy where
before Reagan um most of the economy was
geared towards manufacturing uh
producing real wealth for export around
the world. And when with the rise of
reggonomics then you have a shift
towards finan financialization where
America started to absorb all this easy
money from the world and translated into
these risky financial instruments like
derivatives and uh CDOS's. Um so CDOS's
that caused the uh 2008 great financial
crisis. Okay that's the first trend.
Second trend is the deregulation of the
uh financial industry. uh the repealing
of the glass dangle act where retail
banking and investment banking were cuts
were kept sep separate. This led for led
to a massive consolidation of the
financial industry and so these banks
became too big to fail. Um so that's the
um second big trend. The third big trend
is basically the elite capture of
Washington DC. So if you if you may
recall that in '90s um before Bill
Clinton, the Democratic Party was the uh
party of the working class. So they
opposed NAFTA. They opposed um most f
most trade uh nation status for China.
Uh they opposed immigration. Okay, that
was the Democratic Party in the 80s. And
uh looking back, you know, I don't think
anyone can remember what the Democratic
Party looked like in the uh 80s. But now
the dem Democratic party is really the
party of the professional management
class especially the finance sector. So
you have the um the elite capture of
Washington DC. And so 2008 was a turning
point because remember like Obama uh ran
with a so of hope and change. And what
what he promised was basically
uh to reverse all these trends that were
uh creating this parasitic elite in
America. And of course what happened
when he first when he got into office
was he appointed Larry Summers um um and
you know Larry Summers and his team the
same people who created the the great
financial crisis in the first place to
resolve the issue and of course what
they did was they allowed for quite a
easing. Uh they basically bailed out all
their friends on Wall Street and they
screwed over the American people. You
know, most people don't understand this,
but you know, Obama was the first black
president, but home uh ownership among
Africans declined most rapidly during
Obama than than under any other
presidency in American history. So, more
blacks lost their homes under Obama than
under any other president. So, Obama
just screwed over uh the working class,
especially the minority working class
that was most hopeful for his regime.
And 2008, 2009 marked marked a turning
point. And basically the Democratic
party uh has now been co-opted by the
financial elite and um it's and this is
this something that still continues
today. So so unfortunately um it doesn't
seem as though the Democratic party can
reverse this trend.
>> Yeah, this wealth transfer from the
middle class to the rich, it was quite
extraordinary and uh one would then
expect there would be a revolt against
the elites as a result. And uh you know
when we speak of populism which is now
very much demonized as a word it it is
the people who are then referring to the
the elites becoming too detached from
the public. But this seems like a very
natural criticism or a reaction to this
kind of wealth transfer. And well,
I like that you go back to ancient
Greece and all because like a key
concern for people like uh Plato or
Aristotle would be that democracy would
devolve into tyranny because the longer
any people were free or you had liberty,
they would begin to challenge all
external authorities. So the son would
challenge the father, the student would
challenge the teacher and uh it seems a
lot of our current liberalism feeds into
this though that you reject all
authorities but but uh it also
eliminates then all hierarchies but you
know we have good hierarchies and benign
the good ones are you know the father
and the son the teacher and the student
where the one wants to bring the other
one ideally above oneself I mean yeah
that's most fathers would want their
sons to do better than them that's a
good hier hierarchy. But it seems that
uh in society we're losing all of these
benign not all of it that's maybe
exaggeration but the benign hierarchies
are in decline while we now have the
more vicious or extractive rentier
exploitative hierarchies they are on the
rise. uh how do you how do you see this
development because is this then uh the
end of or the death of the democracy and
rise of tyranny or how how can we
predict how this will play out right so
um let's look at ancient Rome okay so
after the punic wars the three punic
wars um Rome was the undisputed master
of the Mediterranean um but it had this
war machine that kept on going to start
wars overseas. Why? Because the entire
women economy was based on on starting
wars. So, so what would happen is this
nobility would start these wars in order
to capture slaves to run their estates.
Now, when they start out these wars,
they would conscript these peasants. And
because these peasants could no longer
work the land, they have to get loans
with their land as collateral. And of
course, um because of bad luck, because
they got killed in the war, the family
would lose this land. And so what would
happen is that the nobility would
consolidate all this land and the
peasantry uh became a renter class and
they were forced to go in the city of
Rome to look for work and um this became
a very unstable element in Roman society
because now you have the rise of
populism. So the first major reformers
were the Grai brothers, Tiver Graas. And
his reform entre reform platform was the
most innocuous, okay, the most
reasonable platform ever in human
history. All he said was, "Hey guys, so
our peasant class, they can't they can't
work the land anymore because there's no
land for them. But we, the Roman state,
have all this public land that's not
being used. So let's just give some of
this public land to these peasants who
want to work hard and grow food for the
family and that that's that's like the
most reasonable strategy in the world,
right? The problem is that the nobility
treated public land as private land. So
even though they were actually using
this land, they still thought this land
was their own personal land. So they
took a front to Tabber Crox's proposal
and what they did was on the streets of
Rome, they beat him to death. Not only
they beat him to death, but they also
beat his brother to death. And these are
known as the Grai Brothers. So,
[laughter]
so, so I mean I understand populism
sounds bad, but we, if you look at
history, look at how the ancient Greeks
treated their peasant class. If you look
at how the ancient Romans treated their
peasant class, uh the elite becomes
arrogant, become complacent,
um, and they are completely resistance
to reform. In fact, if you propose any
reform, they will kill you. And this
allows for the rise of these adventurers
um these demagogues that are able to
harness the uh anger of the people and
turn them against elite. And of course
um in in Rome it was that this allowed
for the rise of Julius Caesar. Now what
allowed for the rise of Julius Caesar
was something really really simple. He
he treated people with decency. you
know, he went off to Gaul to start off
these wars and rather than take all the
plunge for himself, he would actually
give it to his soldiers and that in end
engender tremendous loyalty among his
soldiers. So much so that his army was
able to defeat the entire Roman Empire
and establish um uh Julio Caesar as the
dictator of Rome. Of course, this would
eventually lead to his uh assassination,
but then this would lead to the rise of
um Octavius uh Octavius Caesar and they
establishment of the Roman Empire. So,
um, if history teaches something, it's
it's this. It's this.
The people don't want to rise up. The
people don't want to, uh, rally behind a
demagogue. Uh, but the elite often do
not give people a choice because the
elite are parasitic. They're arrogant
and they're completely indifferent to
the plight of the people. And this is
something something we're seeing
throughout the Western world today where
the elite live in their own bubble. They
don't understand the suffering of the
people. Look, the reality is that in
America today, most of the people cannot
afford an emergency that cost $500. If
they get sick and they have to go to
hospital, they have to shove $500. They
can't do it. Um the groceries um are
going sky are the grocery prices are
skyrocketing. Um they're heavily in
debt. I mean, if you're an average
American, life is really hard for you.
And we we really don't see any um
possible exit. Look, 2016, okay, we
would live in a different world if in
2016 Bernie Sanders were the Democratic
nominee. And honestly, if the Democrats
had a fear Democratic primary like the
Rep Republicans did, that Bernie Sanders
would have been the nominee in 2016 and
2020, and he would have won the
presidency. But they insisted on rigging
the uh primary and this allowed for the
rise of Trump. So Trump would not have
been possible, Trump would not be
feasible without the fact that the
Democrats are a very corrupt um and very
arrogant and very out of touch uh party.
>> Yeah. Well, I also tend to look at
populism as a yeah mechanism to a elite
that becomes more decoupled. But uh you
make a good point though that the co the
populists do not always have good
answers. I mean they have the finger on
the pulse of the public. They they they
respond to the
yeah the the detachment but uh but uh
yeah I wanted to ask about Trump for for
that one reason though because uh in in
Europe especially there's no journalist
or politician can understand why the
Americans would have voted for him. I
you know to be honest I would likely
have voted for him if I was American
just to throw a wrench into the system
because it wasn't sustainable. It was
going from bad to worse. That doesn't
mean that I think his solutions are very
good. I think his tariffs are a mess.
They don't work. Uh the idea of always
solving all problems with these quick
fixes and through strength and now more
and more war I think it's it's it's not
a great uh approach. But uh um but but
not not understanding his appeal. I
think that's u that's quite dangerous.
But how how do you see him going down if
again he would make a prediction here
with Trump? Do you see do you see him
dissolving democracy or is he able to
hold the the elites accountable or how
do you see yeah his path forward? Look,
in 2016, um, the entire world was
shocked, bewilder, confused, perplexed,
disturbed by, uh, the fact that he was
able to beat Hillary Clinton, who is a
career politician. Um, she was a
secretary of state, also the first lady.
She has tremendous political experience
with a, you know, a team of like
thousands of queer politicians solidly
behind her. So, she would have been a
very effective politician and press
president if she had won. and that
Americans didn't want that because as
you say, they were sick of the system um
as it was. Um Hillary Clinton would have
just been another corrupt politician
that have looked after her her friends
and screwed over the American middle
class. And so, you know, they did these
um interviews with these average
Americans and um they were asked like,
"Why did you vote for Trump even though
he was not a reliable, not a experienced
um politician?" And their response was
because I wanted to assert my authority,
because I wanted to assert my agency,
because I wanted my voice to matter. I'm
sick of being pissed on by the elite.
That's that's the reason why um you know
this Washington elite in this this in
Washington DC, in San Francisco, in New
York City, they don't even know I exist.
And now by electing Trump, they know I
exist and that my voice matters. And you
know, that's why they they they voted
for him. And then in 2020,
um, the people didn't want the division
that Trump caused, so they elected, uh,
Biden and their lives, their lives got
worse and worse. So, they're in a
situation where um, you know, if they
vote for who they're supposed to vote
for, this person just ignores their uh,
plight. This person will do nothing to
improve their livelihood. Trump on the
other hand is someone who could throw a
wrench in the system as you point out.
This is someone who can uh disrupt the
status quo and he's doing that right now
with with project 2025 right thing but
the people certainly don't want the
things to stay as they are right so
people are voting for change even though
it may lead to chaos in the hope that
their life might get a bit better.
there's a burn down the current house
hoping that something else will uh yeah
come in its place. Uh but uh well I I
want to shift to yeah I guess more
specifics because in here in Europe
we're fighting now uh well I would have
called it a proxy war against Russia but
it's becoming increasingly a very direct
war and I thought it was interesting you
mentioned Spangler before in the
civilizational discourse because he you
know he used to refer to well to the
Russians as more barbaric and primitive
but when he did so he he did it in the
context you said that they were more
youthful and he actually saw it as being
beneficial to reach out to the Russians
to I guess regain some of Europe's
vitality and u and and youth but uh
there's no such sentiment uh today it's
more of course one could say there was
also a bit demeaning reference to them
but but nonetheless
in in that framework of civilizations
taking you know the lifespan of a human
being the the Russians were seen as
being the youthful part but today in
Ukraine war. Uh where do you see this
going? Because uh I'm I'm very perplexed
by the mere information which is coming
out. It seems so very much divorced from
reality. So for example in the 1990s the
whole decade we had the discussions
about the dangers of expanding NATO
without taking in Russia. Now it's all
memory hold. It's it never happened. Um
so where do you see this war actually
going?
Yeah. So, um I think for the past year,
the war has been over and um if you just
look at the front lines, if you look at
how the Russians are fighting fighting
this war as opposed to how the
Ukrainians are fighting this war, the
Russian soldiers are demonstrating
energy, openness, and cohesion. What I
mean by that is that they're constantly
learning from their mistakes and
adapting to the circumstances. So the
Russians um have mastered drone war
warfare for reconnaissance purposes. Um
they um at first they were using um you
know these large battalion units to
against the uh Ukrainians and they
realized that they could be easily
targeted um and attacked by drones. So
now it's it's like two or three um
reconnaissance infantry on motorcycles
and that's destroying uh Ukrainian
defenses because the front lines are
huge and the Ukrainians are not able to
um um respond to such energy and
innovation initiative among the Russian
soldiers. And if you talk to these
Russian soldiers uh if you interview
these Russian soldiers on the front
lines, they will tell you this is a
crusade. This a crusade to save Russian
civilization. This is a crusade to um
save the motherland. This is a crusade
to destroy the antichrist which is which
they believe is the corruption of
western civilization. So they're
extremely energetic. They're extremely
open. They're extremely cohesive. And
then you go talk to these Ukrainian
soldiers and it's the complete opposite
right now. Now they're dragging these
50-year-old men off the streets of
Ukraine to fight this war that's
completely pointless, hopeless, and
lost. The desertion rates among the
Ukrainian soldiers are just skyhigh,
right? Like you're talking like hundred
thousands of soldiers who are deserting.
So this war is completely lost. And the
reason why Ukrainians um have not admit
defeat is that it would be political
suicide for the regime in Kiev to emit
defeat, right? Because if Linsky after
promising for the past four years that
you know Russia is just a house of cards
that's going to decline that that that
will collapse because of Russian
sanctions the very next day. You you've
been saying this for the past four
years. You've won the social media war.
I mean if you just like watch social
media the Ukrainians have been amazing.
Um you can't tell your people the war is
lost. Uh you're going to get
assassinated. Um, and regardless of what
happens, um, if you admit defeat, the
political revolution in Ukraine. So, the
Ukrainians are stuck where they are. Uh,
they have to see this thing to the
bitter end. Now, the Europeans are
sponsoring the Ukrainians with
expectation that u the Ukrainians will
win this war. And look, um, this isn't
really u well said in the media, but
NATO has been in this war ever since the
beginning. Yes, it is Ukrainian
manpower. It is Ukrainian soldiers on
the front lines, but is NATO uh
weaponry, NATO targeting, NATO
surveillance, NATO special forces, NATO
command and control, um NATO financing.
It's been everything um from from NATO.
So NATO is sort of stuck as well in this
war. It's some cost fallacy. It's like
you go to to a gambling house and you've
lost a million dollars. You can't leave
because how do you tell your your wife
that you lost a million dollars, right?
So you're stuck where you are. So
Ukraine's stuck. NATO is stuck. and this
war is going to be resolved only by a
military solution. I I know there's a 20
point deal on the table right now.
There's no way that Ukraine can say yes
to this. There's no way that NATO can
say yes to this. And so I think what's
going to happen is the Russians are
going to march all all the way to
Odessa. And once they take Odessa, this
war is over. Um because um Russia will
obtain all its strategic objectives and
by that point NATO would would have um
imploded by then.
I like the way you used the openness as
a point of departure because often in
the west we have to subscribe to the
idea that we are open because we're the
liberal democracy where Russia's
authoritarian so it's closed but uh but
but it seems one of our main problems in
Europe is that uh exactly that we have
become closed in terms of uh refusing to
see reality as it is that I I agree that
usually in a war the invading forces
versus defending forces you will see
advantage of the defending response in
terms of morale because they're
defending the homeland. They will have
greater motivation as opposed to anyone
who is just militarily opportunistic. Uh
but uh this is kind of been the the
assumption in the west that the
Ukrainians would fight and the the
Russians would simply flee because they
would realize the moral corruption of
their government towards just trying to
snatch some new territories. Um but all
of this left NATO out of the equation
though that is uh and if we leave NATO
out because we can't say that we're
involved uh suddenly that that that
undermines our ability to interpret the
motivations of the Russians as you say
they genuinely see this as a war for
their own existence and I would add for
very good reason as well but uh but
again if we have to all conform to this
narrative that is just opportunism
they're just hungry for more territory
this is just the Russian DNA. Um, you
know, all our analysis will uh uh will
then be wrong. And uh I'm wondering if
you see the openness as part of the
weakness we have because it's not just
one issue. It's I think a big crisis we
have in the West is a crisis of lack of
strategy. That is we can't even
interpret threats anymore. Threats
entails assessing intentions and
capabilities. But when you're obligated
to hate your opponent, how can you
possibly interpret their intentions and
capabilities in an objective manner? I
mean in Europe, you can't even discuss
the security concern of your opponents.
I mean come to the come to this
continent try to explain what do you
think are the security concerns of
China, Iran, Russia, you would you know
crucified you would have have your
career destroyed. They they come after
you. This is it's incredible. you how
are you going to have sensible policies
if you can't actually talk about your
opponents in a way that actually
humanizes them?
>> Look, um I went to school at Yale and
this was like the u late 90s and Yale
college um America at that point was a
very open dynamic society where you were
welcome to criticize everyone and
everything and I and I said to myself,
you know what, if a s society is so
open, there's no way it could ever
decline. You know, fast forward to 2016,
right? 2016, you had Brexit. You had the
election of Donald Trump. And at this
point, if you're part of the elite, now
is a good time to reflect and appreciate
the world isn't what you think it is,
and to appreciate that um there are some
serious
problems in society that need to be
addressed, especially wealth inequality,
especially corruption, um especially
debt among among the poor. And so
[snorts] now is a good time to reset
your society. Instead, the elite chose
to turtle up um and create their own
bubble and um just ignore all
criticisms. And this was this was made
worse during COVID. And this and this
became extreme extremely insular. The
elite became extremely insular after the
Russians invaded Ukraine because um the
Russians invading Ukraine was a paradigm
shift for the western elite because they
couldn't imagine like anyone could
possibly challenge the empire, right?
Right? I mean, the Russians were this
gas station with nuclear weapons and
they were poor, backward people that
survived on Western generosity. Um, and
their elite was extremely corrupt. So,
how could they dare possibly challenge
us? So, the Russian invasion was a major
uh shot in the face of the elite. I
mean, it sort of popped their bubble,
but then like, you know what? We we'll
just double down. We'll we'll we'll just
continue believing our silly beliefs
even though they make no sense. and we
will believe that Ukraine will win this
war. And so we've reached a point where
unfortunately the biggest problem in the
western world is the arrogance, the
insularity and the close-mindedness of
the of the elite. And the elite now has
absolutely no strategic foresight. Not
not only will they refuse to consider uh
the strategic considerations of Russia,
Iran and China as you say, but they also
refuse to admit that they could be at
fault for what happened. Right. They
absolutely refused to to accept that,
you know, expressionism, NATO
expressionism provoked the Russians into
th this war and they have absolutely no
plans for moving forward. You ask them
like, you know, well, you know, if
Ukraine loses this war, what what are
you going to do? And they're like,
they're going to lose this war. Okay.
Well, um, what what's going to happen if
America forces you to send troops to
Ukraine? Like, uh, well, you know, they
obviously no idea what to do. So you
have this western elite that um has put
their has put their heads in the sand.
They collective collectively put their
heads in the sand and they're praying
the sky doesn't fall on them, but the
sky is going to fall on them.
>> Yeah. No. Well, I again this is one of
I've never seen anything like this. Uh
people talked about propaganda during
the invasion of Iraq. I remember that.
Well,
this just it pales in comparison. I mean
this media coverage of Russians sending
meat waves and you know all of this is
easy easy to disprove but that's my
point. If you had an open society where
you could disprove it would be one thing
but even if you look through the whole
uh history of the conflict that is from
the coup. It's very easy to to prove to
come up with the evidence that it was a
coup that there was a toppling that and
again within the first 24 hours of the
coup the US and others began to seize
control over the intelligence agencies
government economy of Ukraine to use it
as a tool against the Russians. But even
when you have the facts which can't be
disputed I I noticed um we gone to a
different uh level now. Now they say
well you then you're supporting the
Russian narratives. So it's no longer if
it's true or not. It's just that that
story seems to um give legitimacy to the
Russians and it delegitimizes us. So by
merely presenting you know irrespective
of it being correct it's just the
narratives this is the problem you
should be in the trenches with us and
then you you avoid you just say ABC this
is all you have to do even the sanctions
uh this is something that also perplexed
me because since 2014 that was my main
research focus that is Russia
diversifying its economy looking towards
the east making itself uh more
bulletproof to sanctions so I I made a
point immediately as the sanctions came
they can never succeed. Russia's
prepared for this. It's like, oh, but
this is you're undermining trust, you
know, in the sanctions. It's all a
socially constructed phenomenon. If we
believe the sanctions work, people will
support them and then eventually Russia
will be exhausted. So reality is uh
yeah, it's not part of the discussion
anymore. It's just a battle of
narratives it seems.
>> Look, look, I mean the reality is that
Western elite has absolutely no plan
moving forward. They have absolutely no
imagination. they are not able to
reflect and innovate. Okay, so you know
they impose sanctions in on Russia in
2020 because they imposed sanctions on
Russia in 2014 and you know Trump comes
in office and at this point everyone
knows sanctions are not going to work.
In fact, the Russian economy is doing
quite well. Uh so you know Russia has so
many workarounds workarounds these these
um against these western sanctions and
Trump basically said to Putin you know
if you don't cooperate with me I'm going
to impose sanctions on you. So we've
reached a point where the entire Western
world lives in their own bubble far
removed from from reality. Another issue
that is going to tear Western Europe
apart is immigration. Um so you know I
mean yeah I mean this war in Russia in
Ukraine is not going well but look this
immigration issue it's going to tear
western society apart. You look at
what's happening in France in um in the
UK. I mean, you have these race riots
going on, and you have to ask yourself
how much longer society can stay uh
together uh now that you have so much
immigration, you have so much uh
conflict
within these these nation states. So, so
unfortunately, I think looking forward,
I think that what's going to happen is
that the western world, especially NATO,
is going to commit more in Ukraine and
this is going to cause civil wars within
the societies. and they are unable to
see what is bleeding obvious to everyone
else.
Well, if we shift towards another part
of the world uh because these are indeed
turbulent times to a large extent by the
exhaustion of the west but also the rise
of new centers of power and uh China of
course is one that exudes a lot of
energy at the moment. It's uh um well
anyone who goes there can almost feel it
in the air. But uh these are for this
reason turbulent though I mean we this
would one would think that a clash
between these two giants uh China and
the US to come in different forms.
Indeed, it is in terms of an economic
war, but if it's not winning through on
the American side, uh you know, will
will they go into a military option or
how how do you see the the USChina
rivalry playing out?
>> Yeah. So, I have a very different take
on the USChina rivalry than other an
analyst. Okay. I believe
um Russia, Iran
are both revisionist powers in that they
have been isolated. they've been
ostracized by the global economy
controlled by the United States and uh
its allies. But China is very much a
status power in that it has benefited
tremendously um these past 40 years from
globalization especially uh trade with
the United States. And you could also
argue the United States economies and
the Chinese economies are codependent.
Meaning what happens is that China is
taking all its excess cheap labor and
exporting to United States. In return,
United States gives China US dollars. So
what's happening is that is that
basically uh China is basically
supporting or propping up uh the US
dollar which everyone knows is a Ponzi
scheme and um the United States in
return is transferring technology to
China and helping China become wealthier
and opening and also opening its vast
consumer market to Chinese consumer
goods and th and therefore uh giving
Chinese millions and millions of
employment opportunities. So I think
that China and United States will
eventually achieve a reproach month and
we're we're already seeing that because
um you know President C and President
Trump did meet in South Korea um and the
meeting went very um quarterly. It was
not a great meeting, but Trump thought
it went really well and um we should
expect more meetings in the coming year
and I think that what will happen is a
reproachment between China and United
States because they benefit more from
working together than they do from
fighting uh together and these two
economies are basically [clears throat]
inter dependent and they're intertwined,
right? because you know America has been
talking for the past 10 years about
onshoring its manufacturing and it
hasn't worked out because uh the
American economy cannot sustain uh the
cost of onshoring the manufacturing and
all these like these billion dollar
projects that um have been emphasized
highlighted have not turned out really
well. So China is basically
irreplaceable in terms of like providing
cheap manufacturing to the United
States. So um I think I think the United
States and China will um the the
friendship will improve over time.
Well, it does seem that uh a lot of the
hostility coming towards China from the
US is
yeah based on the idea that they can't
live side by side by a powerful China.
In other words, it looks as if it's
something that undermines the US
hedgeimon as opposed to undermining the
US itself. uh I don't know I I get the
impression that uh well the US can't
really restore its uh former hedge money
that is the 1990s not coming back and I
think uh if there was rational
discussions more of it in the US and
actually there are more and more voices
suggesting that the a settlement could
be fined with China found with China
because if the US would accept China it
doesn't have to prevent its rise the US
would actually have some benefits to be,
you know, one among equals in a
multipolar system. It could reduce its
foreign exposure, could stop bleeding so
many resources, can get its economic
house in order, stabilize society,
economy. But uh uh but of course uh
states do not always act rational when
they're in decline. That's why that's
usually where my pessimism come from.
the
from the realist from the rational
perspective one would think that the US
given that the counter restore hedgemony
that it could stabilize under a
multipolar system that there would be
some room there for harmony but uh my
last question is though on um again the
two Eurasian giants the big thing that
no one seemed to predict was uh that um
yeah China and Russia would find common
ground
indeed their economies are quite you
know mutually complimentary
unlike between Europe and Russia there's
no Ukraine in between that can be used
as a proxy to decouple uh should we be
surprised that uh if if this partnership
um I guess is sustained over time
>> yeah um I am not not that optimistic
about the US sorry I'm not that
optimistic about the Russia China
relationship because I think there are
some geopolitical questions that need to
be resolved. Okay. So, one flash point
that comes to mind is is Kazakhstan. So,
ever since the 1980s, China has been
heavily investing heavily in Kazakhstan
because, you know, Kazakhstan is such a
pivot point for the belt and road
initiative. Everything basically has to
pass through Kazakhstan in order to
reach the Middle East and to Europe. So,
um China has been spending a lot of
resources trying to co-op the Kazakhstan
elite. it's invested heavily in
Kazakhstan and um what's happened these
past few years is that Kazakhstan has uh
developed a much more pro-Russian
attitude. Uh you basically had a change
in the guard in Kazakhstan and so um the
Kazakhstan government is leaning more
towards uh Russia. So um my point is
like I I understand that um people see
Iran,
Russia and China forming this Eurasian
block that can uh negate American naval
power and if that were to happen then
the Eurasian continent would prosper.
But we have to remember that geography
and history are pretty uh persistent and
Russia, China, Iran have had long
histories of conflict, long histories of
ge geographical and geopolitical
tension. So I don't know how easily uh
these conflicts can be resolved. So I
know like China's very heavily invested
in the belt and road initiative but you
know Russia has its north south
corridor. uh Iran has its own uh trade
route programs. So the question then is
okay if these three nations were to come
together and work together who would be
the top dog whose currency would be the
universal currency um and can all these
territorial disputes that have been that
have been um persistent for the past few
centuries can they be resolved through
negotiations. So, um I think there are
some serious geopolitical issues that
need to be resolved before these nations
can work peacefully together.
>> Yeah. Cuz um well, what what one often
hears from China and Russia is that
they're not allies. They're more than
allies because an ally would essentially
be country A and B cooperating against
country C. uh in other words do uh the
the argument is therefore they're not
dependent on collectively balancing the
US but uh this is what I was wondering
do do you see uh again the United States
I think everyone recognizes that at
least uh the US attempting to impose its
primacy has brought together these these
countries but if the US would uh end
this um its aspirations to restore
hedgemony and they wouldn't no longer
require this collective balancing. Do
you think that a lot of these problems
or challenges between the Chinese,
Russians, Iranians would then begin to
surface more uh if if the US is taken
out of the equation?
>> Okay. So, if I were a Chinese
geopolitical strategist, I'm not. Okay.
But I'm saying if I were if I work for
the government, what I would say is that
I'll definitely speaking it's probably
better for China that the US remains in
Southeast Asia than if it were to leave.
The reason why is let's imagine the US
leaves. Okay. Well, how would ch how
would Japan respond? How would India
respond? How would Russia respond? How
would South Korea respond? How would
North Korea respond? Okay. So there are
these different jubil actors in my
region and I really have problems
anticipating how they behave. Um Japan
has been historically very aggressive
because they are a naval power without
uh much land resources. People don't
appreciate this but the great naval
power in Southeast Asia is not the
United States. It's not even China. It
is actually Japan. So if we took out air
power, okay, uh uh Japanese uh the N
Japanese navy will be the dominant naval
power in um Stheast Isa. And the and the
reason why is they have to be uh
remember Japan is an isolated island
with very little resources. So they need
to be able to exert naval hijgemony
throughout the Southeast Asia. Right? So
during World War II, they have something
called the um greater chi greater Japan
co- prosperity spear. So, Japan is very
much an aggressive maritime power. Then
you look at South Korea, which has
always had these historical animosities
against Japan and against China for
being colonized by these two great
powers. Look at Vietnam. You look at
India. So, if I'm a geopolitical
analyst, I'm like, you know what? Um,
I'm happy with the United States being
where it is because at least it it
maintains a status quo and I'm happy
with the status quo because I don't have
to deal with Japan, South Korea, Russia,
and India. So, I'm saying this as a
typical analyst working in China. I
don't I mean I mean I I'm I'm just
saying I prefer things to be much more
predictable, much more stable, much more
continuous. Um and that means have the
United States stay where it is.
>> Yeah. No, I think that's an excellent
point. One should be careful what one
wishes for. that is if uh yeah the US
would leave East Asia uh I think there
would be good chance that that Japan
would uh then cross the threshold of
developing for example nuclear weapons
if they have to maintain their own
deterrent and indeed one can only look
towards Europe. The Trump administration
has questioned its uh interest and
priority of maintaining its presence in
Europe and uh the response I mean look
at Germany who used to be a you know
have a peaceful country that had learned
from World War II. Now it's becoming one
of the most militaristic. They want to
join in on nuclear sharing. They want to
have the biggest army in Europe. I mean
they would like to be on the front of
confronting Russia. I mean this is not
even recognizable of the Germany of only
four or five years ago. So, uh I do
think if the US would pull down from uh
East Asia that um the the the
consequences might not be in China's
favor either. So, I think that's a very
valid point to make. Uh uh before we go
though, do you have any final uh
thoughts?
>> Yeah. So, one thing I'm looking very
closely at and I think your viewers
might be interested in as well is the
rise of Pax Judea. So, um, what I'm
watching is how, um, a lot of nations
believe that Pax Judeica may be in their
best interest and therefore they're
promoting the rise of Pax Judea. So, the
United States promoting the right of
Judeica. That's understandable. But if
I'm Russia, um, Israel would be a very
good trading partner because, you know,
eventually Russia is going to win this
war in Ukraine. Uh, it's going to
control the Dombas and therefore it's
going to be able to control about a
third of the world's carbohydrates.
Where's my market? My market is in
Africa. My market is in the Middle East.
And so Israel would be the perfect entry
point into these markets, right? So if
I'm Russia, um I think that Pak Judea
works to my benefit. If I'm China, Paka
works my benefit as well. Uh because um
Paka means that Israel would take
control over uh Syria, Iraq, uh Egypt,
possibly Libya. And as such um Israel
would need a lot of infrastructure
spending. It it would need a lot of
infrastructure projects. Um it would
also need to spend a lot of money on
data centers on artificial intelligence
and create this massive surveillance
state uh to watch over uh the greater
Israel project of p Judea. So I think
like the big surprise for the next 5 to
10 years is the rise of p Judea and
that's something I'm watching very
closely right now.
But uh wouldn't the counterargument be
though that Israel has begun to exhaust
itself in terms of overextending its
military? Uh the economy is all been
harmed by a lot of the young people
leaving. It's you know it's fueling a
big political crisis now and uh you know
it seems that at the heart of it there's
also deeper problem that is the entire
ethos of what Israel should represent is
being uh uh questioned if not
undermined. Uh, of course you can also
add then uh the neighbors becoming the
leadership across the Arab states and
even Turkey can have now more challenges
in terms of explaining why they're not
taking a more hostile approach to
Israel. Uh given that also the US is in
relative decline and other as his main
protector. Do you you usually one hears
the opposite argument though that Israel
is finished essentially
>> right?
>> How would you respond to that? So I
think the nation of Israel and Paka are
not the same thing. Okay, the nation of
Israel is much it's very much a Zionist
project. I think Pax Judea would be a
project of transnational capital or
finance. So let's just say I have a
billion dollars and I need to go invest
it somewhere. I don't invest in United
States because United States is $38
trillion in debt. Um it is uh divided
and it seems to be on the very brink of
civil war. So it's kind of silly for me
to put a billion dollars in United
States. So where do I put this money?
Well, the only place where I can put
this money uh and see it grow over time
is Israel. Um, and the reason why is the
entire Middle East, you look at Libya,
you look at Iraq, Syria,
um, it it's it's destroyed, but that
that uh offers the opportunity for
growth, right? So, if I'm in capital,
I'm only interested in growth in in
return on investment. So, um, and I I
think like it's every wealthy person
thinks like that. I I I think like if if
I had a billion dollars in the bank and
I I had to put my money somewhere I
would put in Israel and not only that
but I would do my hardest I I would work
very hard to ensure that Israel wins
wins out and as you say you know maybe
there something that that the isselves
don't want but um often history is
decided by those with power as opposed
to um you know the people themselves.
>> It's a very interesting perspective. I
hadn't looked at it from that angle. Uh
so uh yeah before you go where can
people find you and uh follow your work?
>> Yeah so um I have a YouTube channel of
history uh where I upload my lectures on
history. So I'm I'm basically just
trying to analyze what happened before
and try to figure out what it means for
the present. Okay. So um I've done a lot
of analysis analysis of middle Asian
history and I I believe that pax juda is
the future. I think that issue will
become a dominant power in uh the Middle
East. So if you want to understand my
reasoning, my analysis, definitely check
out my YouTube channel where I go into
the history of the Middle East. I also
have a sub I also have a Substack also
called predictive history where you can
subscribe. Uh most of articles are free.
Uh so if you're interested in my
political analysis, I I would highly
recommend it.
>> Okay, thank you. Yeah, we should have
devoted more time to the Middle East,
but maybe next time. So thank you so
much.
>> Okay, bye.